---
layout: post
title: "Dreams"
date: 2020-12-14
---

"My dream job is to work at SpaceX or NASA as an engineer to help plan and design the mission to Mars."
I wrote this in a college application essay on January 7th, 2014. Fast forward 6 years later, and I am not working
at SpaceX nor did I attend the college I sent that essay to.

So what happened to my dream job? Good question. Over the course of my undergraduate and (soon to be done) graduate
education I have changed my mode of thought from "I need to work at Company X to fulfill my dreams" to 
"I need to do the best work I can to fulfill my dreams". I think almost any job can be your dream job if you approach it
with the highest degree of professionalism and integrity that you can. Simply being a practitioner of these two 
qualities is my ideal. This sentiment is echoed in a book I read earlier this year, "Deep Work" by Cal Newport.
His stance is "You don't need a rarified job, you need a rarified approach to your work.". Are there exceptions to this? Probably. But even when
I had to shovel trash into dumpsters for a job I tried to do a good job and not cut corners. I think the value of taking pride in what you do is
underestimated.

After some self examination I think that my dream job was SpaceX in 2014 because their overall mission is to benefit
and advance humanity. I soon realized you don't have to work at SpaceX to do those things.
Additionally I think I am not ideally suited to work at SpaceX due to not being a C++ wizard (maybe closer to a seg fault wizard). 
However, I realized can advance humanity no matter where I work by doing my best to be diligent in my work as well as being an active member
of my community (which I am working on). So I think I am still accomplishing my "dream" of helping humanity in the capacity that I can.


Whenever I find myself thinking about "dream jobs" I often think about one of my friends who I will refer to as Friend A.
I quickly became good friends with A early in my undergraduate career. In many conversations, I remember A saying they wanted to work for a certain company, which I will call X.
It was very clear to me that A was very passionate about Company X. Not only that, A is very qualified and would no doubt succeed if they worked at Company X. From 
my limited observations, I don't think A ever applied to Company X nor did they really pursue a career path that would lead them to it. Unfortunately A and I grew apart after those early years 
so I never really got to ask them why they never pursued Company X. Was A's "actual" dream to accomplish what Company X accomplishes? (My rationalization for not pursuing my "dream" job). Did A think
they were not qualified? Maybe their "dream job" changed and was no longer working for X. Or maybe they will eventually end up there in the future.

Even though I will probably never find out the real reason I still think about our "dreams" and how our paths both diverged from those dreams. 
As for myself, I believe I am still on the path to accomplish my dreams.
I hope A is too.


