---
layout: post
title: "Stratification of Skill and The Queen's Gambit"
date: 2020-11-29
---

I recently finished watching the Netflix Limited Series "The Queen's Gambit". While I do not consider myself a connoisseur of Netflix original content I really enjoyed the series as a whole. Usually I don't really watch TV shows at all but since The Queen's Gambit features chess prominently it captured my interest. Overall, the show had excellent acting, a compelling story, and a captivating soundtrack. (I do consider myself a soundtrack aficionado).

That being said, the purpose of this post is not to review The Queen's Gambit but instead to discuss a phenomenon I thought the show portrayed particularly well. This phenomenon is what I informally refer to as the "stratification of skill". In other words, the levels of skill that are displayed by different practitioners in any sport, profession, competition, etc.

(SPOILERS AHEAD)

Please do not read further unless you want some major spoilers. I will do my best to not divulge any plot details beyond what is necessary.

During the course of the show Beth Harmon (the protagonist) plays chess against a series of increasingly challenging opponents. She starts out playing her mentor Mr. Shaibel, then high school students, then the Kentucky State Champion (Harry Beltik), the US Champion (Benny Watts) and finally the world champion (Vasily Borgov)*.

*all fictional players

As Beth is a chess prodigy, she rapidly dispatches Mr. Shaibel and the high school chess club after her initial introduction to the game. However, she is not a casual player who has world champion chess skill divinely bestowed upon her. She is passionate about the game, and studies chess openings and plays games in her head nonstop when she is not actually playing. After a few years of this, she enters the Kentucky state tournament. She again cleans house with her opponents until reaching the #1 ranked player in Kentucky, Harry Beltik. Beth's game with Beltik is very drawn out and stretches her to her limit as a player, even with natural gifts and YEARS of study.

Beth goes on to win the state tournament , and after a few years plays in the nationwide chess tournament. Again, she has played against the highest level of competition available to her and has engaged in diligent study for a span of several more years after the state tournament. She goes on to lose to the U.S. champion Benny Watts.

Eventually, she beats Watts and moves up to the world stage. Here the competition is even more fierce and well trained than any she has previously faced. Beth ends up reaching the height of chess achievement by defeating Borgov in the USSR after 2 crushing defeats to him in years prior to her victory. Beth's world championship victory was (in my observation) a feat beyond that of mere perseverance. In the years leading up to her climactic world championship she had been playing constantly, studying her weaknesses, and training with past opponents including Beltik and Watts.

In summary, to reach the world stage Beth had natural talent combined with (roughly) 15 years of dedicated study and practice. Not only that, but she had good teachers along the way and had to conquer her inner demons including her troubled childhood and substance abuse. It was only after this long, lonely, and winding journey that she was even able to COMPETE on the world stage, let alone win.

This separation of skill levels is what has consumed my thinking more than anything else after my conclusion of the show. I have observed degrees of this in other places as well. One example is in basketball. Players who were studs in my high school may have only ("only") gone on to play division 3 basketball. Only historically good players (from my high school's perspective) have gone on to play D1. Of my university's D1 basketball team, the very best players I watched on the team are fringe players in the NBA. And even those "only" D3 players could walk into any pickup game and crush everyone on the court.

There are numerous other examples of this I have observed throughout my life in addition to this, including music performance, technical skill, and games. That being said I think I have hammered this point home already.

My aim in this post is not to really provide any definitive conclusion about the stratification of skill, but to muse further on the subject. Is success climbing to the highest tier of skill? Is success giving your all to the “tier” you find yourself in regardless of the results? Or is success something else that you define for yourself?

On an even further tangent, if success is reaching the highest tier of a skill, is it worth the self sacrifice and introspection into the dark corners of your soul that is necessary to reach that pinnacle? … I guess that is up for you to decide. Because I for sure don’t know.

Hopefully this blog post has encouraged you to view The Queen’s Gambit from a new perspective than the one you had. Either that, or appreciate how damn good Beth Harmon was at chess. See you in the next post.
